are you sick and tired of rains that
haven't stopped for weeks on end then
consider yourself lucky that you didn't
live in the Triassic period around 234
million years ago that was the beginning
of a very long rainy season has in a two
million year long rainy season once rain
didn't stop for two million years you'll
learn more about this unprecedented
phenomenon after you hit subscribe and
wring the notification bell to join us
on the bright side of life
[Music]
so let's start at the end of the permian
geological period that was the time of
the deadliest mass extinction that has
ever happened on earth well no period of
history would be called the Great dying
without a reason right around 252
million years ago
70% of terrestrial vertebrates as well
as 90% of marine creatures were wiped
off the surface of the planet animal and
plant life on Earth couldn't fully
recover from this catastrophe for the
next 10 million years nobody knows for
sure what caused all these creatures to
die out experts named several possible
culprits for example the ozone layer
collapse volcanic activity in Siberia an
asteroid impact acid rain and even
mercury poisoning one of the most recent
theories however states that the cause
of the Great dying might have been
burning coal dr. Benjamin Berger an
associate professor of geology from Utah
State University found some traces of
lead and Mercury which are both
byproducts of burning coal in his
samples of a rock layer in Utah this
layer was formed at the end of the
Permian and the beginning of the
Triassic period from 251 to 240 million
years ago this theory would explain why
almost all living creatures on earth
died out at approximately the same time
sulphur emissions from burning coal made
the oceans acidic and this killed most
marine species acid rains destroyed
forests bacteria that lived on dead
bodies started to produce hydrogen
sulfide tox
gasps which finished off the remaining
species temperatures were getting
increasingly higher that's why at the
beginning of the Triassic period the
planet was sweltering with the oceans
hotter than your bathtub and the air
full of carbon dioxide from constant
volcanic eruptions and the
supercontinent Pangea was mostly a vast
stretch of flat and dry land
however this couldn't last forever and
approximately 234 million years ago long
awaited rain fell and everything would
have been perfect if these rains hadn't
continued for two million years but how
did scientists learn about these events
usually they collect information about
ancient climate changes from rocks and
plant fossils in the 90s to geologists
from Britain discovered layers of river
rocks as well as huge lake and coal
swamps sediments these findings didn't
match the image of the dry Triassic
period surprisingly scientists managed
to discover such evidence of human
climate in entirely different places on
the planet this could only mean one
thing
234 million years ago it was raining all
over the world now you might ask another
valid question what on earth could cause
such extreme weather conditions since
this all happened many millions of years
ago scientists don't have a unanimous
opinion but the most plausible
explanation is volcanic activity
approximately one or two million years
before the wet season started there were
several massive volcanic eruptions on
the territory of modern-day British
Columbia and Alaska these eruptions also
known as the Rangel Ian eruptions lasted
for a whopping five million years in
some regions a layer of lava was up to
3.5 miles thick besides during these
eruptions lots of co2 was released into
the atmosphere as a result the
temperature on the planet became from 5
to 18 degrees Fahrenheit higher after
some time all this created perfect
conditions for the new much more humid
climate at that time there was only one
continent called Pangea but
you could imagine how massive it was
naturally a significant part of the
continent was dry with hot summers and
cold winters seasonal monsoons reached
only the coast of the continent and
didn't move further but after the
volcanic activity continued for about 1
million years Earth's atmosphere became
so humid and warm that rain eventually
managed to reach even the central parts
of the supercontinent the season of
rains started
it's no wonder that such dramatic
climate change has led to the
transformation of the animal and plant
world of the planet
curiously almost everybody knows
dinosaurs disappeared nearly
instantaneously after a massive
meteorite hit the planet approximately
66 million years ago but few people know
about how these creatures appeared on
earth it happened roughly 245 million
years ago at the beginning of the
Triassic period there are many
misconceptions about dinosaurs first of
all forget about the image of a huge
predator towering over trees a
significant number of dinosaurs were not
bigger than a good old turkey secondly
these dinosaurs that lived at the
beginning of the Triassic period were
very different from the ones that
appeared at the end of this time span
most of them started off small and grew
more and more massive as the Mesozoic
era went on interestingly dinosaurs
became more diverse and their population
skyrocketed after a tragedy struck there
was another mass extinction that
happened about 232 million years ago
some experts linked this event with the
beginning of the volcanic activity and
its consequences but as soon as the
climate became more humid several
million years later there happened a
boost of Dino diversification the era of
dinosaurs started due to climate change
plant life on Earth changed dramatically
it thrived in the new tropical humid
climate tall trees and lush greenery
started to grow in abundance and
dinosaurs began to increase in size
several theories explain this phenomenon
one of them states that thanks to the
hot climate dinosaurs didn't have to
expend their energy on keeping their
bodies warm instead they could use it to
grow bigger
another theory goes that the reason for
the appearance of huge dinos is the
abundance of food both were herbivores
and carnivores
let's compare several dinosaurs to prove
the point one of the first real dinos
was Celia lysis it was a creature that
lived between 225 and 220 million years
ago this Dino could reach almost 10 feet
in length but wait just 60 pounds no
wonder it got the name hollow form this
nimble bipedal predator fed on small and
phibian Xand reptiles approximately 210
million years ago there appeared an
utterly new kind of dinosaur a massive
herbivore Palladio soros aka
flat lizard this guy could grow up to 23
feet and weighed more than 3 tons it was
the first predecessor of enormous
dinosaurs of the Jurassic period the
main peculiarities of this giant was its
powerful tail and strong separated teeth
that helped the Dino to munch on tough
plants after revitalizing the planet the
monsoon season finally came to an end
the volcanic eruptions were slowing down
at that time and this also played a
significant role in the stabilization of
climate 230 million years ago the
eruptions finally finished and while by
that time the world had already returned
to its old dry and hot self in some
aspects it had changed forever after the
two million year long rainfall the plant
life of Earth changed dramatically there
appeared many types of conifers which
then spread all over the place and weird
creatures of the Permian and early
triassic periods gave way to good old
dinosaurs what would you do if another 2
million year long period of rains was
about to begin
write about your survival ideas in the
comments section below
remember to give us a thumbs up share
this video with your friends and hit the
subscription button to move to the
bright side of life
you